#### Building a Sustainable Future for Our Open Source Projects

We believe that Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) is a wonderful
ecosystem that allows anyone to use software freely. However, to
maintain and enhance its value over the long term, continuous
maintenance and improvement are essential.

Like many FOSS projects, we face the challenge that long-term
sustainability is difficult to achieve through the goodwill and
efforts of developers alone. While the outputs of open-source projects
are incorporated into the products of many companies and their value
is rightfully recognized, the developers who create these outputs are
not always treated as equal partners in the business world.

A license guarantees the "freedom to use," but the spirit of the FOSS
ecosystem is based on a culture of mutual respect and contribution
built upon that freedom. We believe that accepting the "value" of a
project's output while unilaterally refusing dialogue with its
creators simply because they are individuals undermines the
sustainability of this ecosystem.

This issue is not just about corporations; it reflects a deeper
cultural expectation within the FOSS ecosystem itself. Over time, we
have come to take for granted that everything in open source should be
provided for free - not only the code, but also the ongoing effort to
maintain and improve it. However, FOSS licenses guarantee the freedom
to use and modify software; **they do not impose an obligation on
developers to offer perpetual, unpaid maintenance**. When this
distinction is overlooked, maintainers can end up burdened with work
that was never meant to be an open-ended personal commitment. Such an
imbalance not only discourages openness, but also undermines the
sustainability of an ecosystem that has become a vital part of modern
society.

This is not a call for conflict between FOSS developers and users, but
a proposal to build a collaborative relationship to create value
together and make our work sustainable. We especially ask that
corporations incorporating our project's deliverables into their
products or services for commercial gain partner with us to support
the project's maintenance for the healthy development of the
ecosystem.

#### Our Request for Support

We request ongoing financial support from organizations that
incorporate our project's deliverables into their products or services
and derive **annual revenue exceeding US $1 million** from those
products and services, to help cover the costs of maintenance and the
development of new features. While this support is not a legal
obligation, let us be clear: the license is a grant of permission to
use our work, not a service contract obligating us to provide
perpetual, unpaid labor. We consider it a fundamental business
principle that to profit from a critical dependency while contributing
nothing to its stability is an extractive and unsustainable practice.

It is also crucial to recognize what "maintenance" truly entails. In a
living software project, it is not merely about preserving the status
quo of the current version. It is the continuous effort that leads to
security patches, compatibility with new environments, and the very
features that define future versions. Therefore, to claim satisfaction
with an older version as a reason to decline support, while
simultaneously benefiting from the ongoing development that produces
newer, better versions, is a logically inconsistent position.

This support is not intended to fund work for any single company, but
to sustain the project as a shared infrastructure that benefits **all
users and the broader community**. Furthermore, this threshold is
designed so that **individual developers, small-scale projects, and
the majority of our users are not asked to pay**, while seeking
appropriate support from companies that derive significant value from
our project.

We understand that corporate procurement processes are often not
designed with FOSS sustainability in mind. This systemic issue can
only be solved through cooperation. We are committed to finding a
practical path forward together. Active partnership is essential in
structuring a financial relationship that aligns with standard
corporate procedures. Our mutual goal is to treat this partnership as
a conventional operational expense, removing internal barriers and
making sustainability a straightforward business practice.

Our goal is to maintain this project stably over the long term and
develop it into something even more valuable for all users.
Supporting this project helps strengthen the foundation of a healthier
and more sustainable open-source ecosystem, where creators and users
work together responsibly. We hope our collaborative approach can
contribute, in its own small way, to shaping a more balanced and
enduring future for FOSS.

For details, please see our [Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/shibatch/nofreelunch?tab=coc-ov-file) or
its [introduction video](https://youtu.be/35zFfdCuBII).

---

This sustainability statement is copyrighted by Naoki Shibata 2025.
Licensed under [CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

If you agree with the purpose of this statement, you can copy the text
into your project's README to help spread awareness. When doing so,
please also include a file named `SUSTAINABILITY.md` within your
repository that contains the statement and attribution.
